Okay, we're talking about the MetroCom system. We
will be expanding our database to incorporate all
the demographic information that we need for the
city, integrate the census data, the dime file.
Two things that we do here that are very important
that require our use of the computer. is we're
responsible for the council districts and
redistricting our city charter requires that we
redistrict every time that we annex and so and at
least every election year and of course every two
years we have to do redistricting or at least
evaluate the city for redistricting and then
we're responsible for the annexations so that we
have to do studies on both areas and the computer
will help us quite a bit The Texas laws regarding
annexation are, I understand, pretty good
compared to some states. and i gather that's
helped houston in the past in terms of its suburbs
and the suburban growth wanted to incorporate and
taking advantage of the city's resources without
paying taxes to the city yes i think probably we
have the best set of annexation laws in the country
from a municipality's point of view and at this
last session of the legislature we had to beat back
about three attempts to reduce our authority in
the extraterritorial jurisdiction and our
annexation authority. For example, there was a
proposal to have the citizens vote before they
could be annexed. There was another proposal that
we had to announce annexations a year and another
two years ahead of time. So all those things we
finally were able to defeat.
Now, Ephraim, can we Now I'll turn to the major
effort of the department, the major new effort,
which is the comprehensive plan that has received
so much recent publicity. Can you describe how
this effort came into being? Who is responsible
for pushing for a comprehensive plan? And what the
goal of the plan is? And is it going to be a
long-range, general plan for development of the
city? Or is it going to be different than what we
think of as the classical model of a comprehensive
plan? Well, we have developed a Houston solution
to the planning process. And it took me about six
months after I arrived here to develop the
methodology by which we could do a comprehensive
plan for the city of Houston. And it will not be a
comprehensive plan in the traditional sense. The
need for a planning document is evident.
The old, the term that I keep repeating time and
time again is in the past, Houston has reacted to
growth and now we're going to begin to plan for
growth. Because of our lack of land use controls,
it is very difficult to come up with a
comprehensive plan that would then be
implementable. So what we have developed is a
different approach
and use public improvements as the carrot to bring
about growth as we would like to see it occur. So
that the planning process is going to feed right
into our CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PLAN. AND IN THAT
FASHION, WITH THE PLAN CONTROLLING WHERE THE
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS ARE GOING TO GO, THEN WE
THINK THAT THE CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS WOULD
EVENTUALLY, ONCE WE HAVE CAUGHT UP WITH OUR
BACKLOG AND WE'RE BEHIND TIMES IN IMPROVEMENTS,
BUT WE THINK BY 1994 WE WILL BE CAUGHT UP. WE WILL
THEN BE ABLE TO BEGIN TO CONSTRUCT FACILITIES AND
PROJECT where growth is going to occur and
construct the support system for that growth. And
once that support system exists, then it should
attract the growth into those areas. That's seven
years away. Yes, it's seven years away. We have a
capital improvements plan now that covers us
through 1992, a five-year capital improvements
plan. And we think the planning process we're
embarking on now will take us at least four years.
So that the situation that we find ourselves in is
this, that not only are we planning for Houston and
the 600 square miles of Houston, but also the 1,400
square miles of UTJ. How do you relate to HGAC on
this? There is the only interaction that we have
with HGAC has to do with transportation planning
because they are the transportation group for the
area. And so we work with them on major
transportation improvements, et cetera. But
other than that, the HGAC and the other, there's
one other area that we interrelate, and that is in
population estimation. We have formed one
central group here, a central task force, under
the coordination of HGAC to develop all growth
estimates. And so that metro, the city, all the
utilities, HGAC, everyone is using the same
population projection. Well, in that respect,
you have diverged from state government. They use
two.
So what I was trying to do is come up recognizing
that starting from point zero and trying to plan
2,000 square miles, which is an area larger than
the state of Delaware, as the planning magazine
said last time, I thought that the traditional
concept of preparing a comprehensive plan for the
entire area and then implement
smaller segments of it into neighborhood plans
and smaller areas was not feasible.
From taking the overall look first and then coming
down into more specific areas. So in effect, we're
going to do it the opposite way. We have developed,
first of all, As you can imagine, in 2,000 square
miles, there are many separate characteristics
in the various areas. And so we've developed two
major characteristics that we're going to deal
with. One is the inner city neighborhoods, and one
is what we would consider stable neighborhoods
and growth areas. And so we've divided our
planning system into something that we call
neighborhood planning and sector planning.
Because went through that. So you understand the
difference between the two techniques. Right.
And so that right now, we're looking at 25
neighborhood plans and 23 sector plans. And then
we will begin to aggregate them first into
quadrant plans and eventually into what I guess
you could call a comprehensive plan. But I would
more likely call an executive summary, a summary
of what we find in these 48 documents. And these
documents are going to be rather substantial
documents because they will contain everything
on that neighborhood, including a projection as
to what public improvements are going to be
required over a 10 or at least a 10-year period in
the future. And so that is the process we're
embarking in. We're ensuring, first of all, that
there is coordination by implementing what we
call a staff task force that not only includes the
various departments of the city, but also the many
other multiple agencies, the Harris County Flood
Control District, the Turnpike Authority, the
school districts, Metro, all the other agencies
that would have some input into the planning
process. And the big task force is they will have a
specific assignment, and they will be sun-setted
automatically when they finish the task. Yes,
when the planning process is complete, we would
expect these task forces to basically
run out of work, although there will be an update
process that will continue to go on, and we may have
some need for at least a staff task force. The other
task force that we're creating is what we call a
TAC, T-A-C, the Technical Advisory Committee,
and that provides the input from the outside the
government, etc. We have representatives of all
the major organizations, American Institute of
Architects, American Planning Association,
Apartment Association, the Builders
Association,
BOMA, the Building Owners and Managers
Association, NAIOP,
National Association of Office and Industrial
Parks, all these various special interest groups
form a technical advisory committee that will
also provide us some input into the plans. That is
neighborhoods. The neighborhoods will be
represented in two ways. Our technical advisory
committee contains overall citywide
neighborhood representation, plus there will be
local representatives of specific
neighborhoods when covering their specific area
when it's being planned. Is there any formal
procedure for the selection of those people? The
Planning Policy Manual, which has been approved
by the Planning Commission, establishes the
composition of the organizations that would be
represented. We merely ask the organizations
then to give us their representatives. We ask for a
representative and two alternates. And so
yesterday, for example, we met with the staff task
force and the TAC. We had over 100 people here. And
we briefed them on the process, so they understand
the process and what their role will be in this
process.
Good luck. Well... It sounds like a monumental
job. I think it's a major undertaking and We have
received the support of every major organization
in the city except one. The Houston Board of
Realtors has refused to support the process even
though they have provided members to the TAC. They
did want to be represented for the TAC. But every
other organization, the Chamber of Commerce, the
Builders Association, Pardon Association, all
these groups have chosen to support the process.
So we feel that that's a big step already in
assuring that it's going to happen. How did
this... project gap started? Who pressed the
start button for it? Well, of course, when I
arrived here, the mayor gave me three major tasks
he wanted me to accomplish. One was to initiate a
planning process, but she didn't define what
planning process. Two, the initiation of
revitalization in the inner city. And three was to
initiate public-private partnerships.
throughout the city. Up until now, the city, or up
until then, the city and the building community
and the development community had basically been
antagonists. And the idea was to keep the city down
as ineffective as possible in controlling what
was happening. She wanted partnerships to be
established. And so in implementing the planning
side of it, I began to try and devise a method by
which we could eventually get to a comprehensive
plan, recognizing that without land use
controls, the traditional planning system where
you develop a comprehensive plan, which is then
implemented by a zoning plan or something like
that, was impossible. So we have looked at this
opposite approach of using the public
improvements. And the CIP process says that
projects that appear on the comprehensive plan
will be given priority over other projects. So it
gives us a mechanism by which people have now come
forward and want to participate in the process
because they want their particular areas to be
included and receive their fair share of
improvements. Ephraim, in the private sector,
has there been any discussion about the use of
performance standards rather than zoning? Yes,
we've had a lot of discussions. Two particular
groups that are working on these. As we do the
master plans that we're talking about, the
comprehensive plans, one of the planning areas
that we're going to do in the sector is going to be
the downtown. Now, this sector plan has the full
support of the private sector. and particularly
of an organization called Central Houston
Incorporated. Bob Urie is the head of it, which is
the organization of all the major property owners
and corporations downtown. And so the big
question that has come up in that area, plus the
Galleria area where a planning process is also
going to be done, is how are we going to ensure that,
what incentives can we give to people to, assure
ourselves that they would follow the plan well the
answer is right now you don't can't give any
because any uh incentives because right now you
don't have any controls so therefore there can be
no incentives so they have already initiated a
study in working with this department on the full
range of development controls that are used in
other cities all the way from the San
Francisco-New York controls to the
performance-type controls, with the idea of what
is the national standard right now, or state of the
art, and began to look at it from those areas. We are
embarking already on our first major effort on an
off-street parking ordinance. Off-street
parking right now seems kind of innocuous in that
Most cities have included that in their zoning
ordinance or some other thing. But we're looking
at it as a major way of controlling land use because
what is going to happen, particularly in the older
areas of the city, the residential areas, without
deed restrictions, where someone could come in
and just take a residence and convert it to a
restaurant, for example, or office space. Now our
off-street parking ordinance is going to say,
well, if you're going to run a restaurant there,
you're going to have to provide an off-street
parking space for every four seats. Or if you're
going to want an office, you need an off-street
parking space for each 200 square feet of office
space. So now that person just can't come in and
take a house in the middle of the road and convert it
to that because he won't have the adequate
parking. And so in effect, then we have limited the
use of that space to a space that can meet the
off-street parking requirements, which is
probably going to be residential, because we only
require two off-street parking spaces for
residents. So that will begin to control parking.
In the modern buildings in Houston, parking is not
a problem, because lenders have controlled that.
And we find that most buildings either meet or
exceed ULI standards. But it'll be in the older
areas of the city where we're getting the
complaints about restaurants moving into
neighborhoods, clubs, so forth, and creating
parking problems for the residents because the
streets will be full of the clients. And so
off-street parking ordinance by itself will
begin to correct some of these things. But we look
at a series of controls that will be basically
based along the line of performance zoning.
Okay.
Then the procedure will, of course, follow
standard state law procedure in terms of
adoption. Yes. I'm going to mention something, is
that Houston
has a whole body of law that applies only to
Houston. State law. State law that applies only to
Houston and recognizes our unique position as
being unzoned. For example, we have been able to
get extensive legislation on deed restrictions,
a reinstatement of deed restrictions, extension
of deed restrictions, initiation of new deed
restrictions, all made a matter of state law so
that you can use those mechanisms to control land
use. Also, we didn't have any development
controls in legal form until 1983. Prior to that
time, all standards for plant development, plant
preparation, just existed as policies of the
department and had no legal basis. In 1983, when
the city passed its development ordinance, we
were confronted with a situation that anything
prior to 1983 was basically grandfathered. If you
didn't need to subdivide to construct something,
You were grandfathered. And so we developed what
we called a development plan. And that was a plan
that would be used in those instances where you
needed a building permit, but a subdivision plan
was not appropriate according to state law. And
you had a 25-acre tract of land, and you were going
to build a shopping center. Under state law, you
don't have to submit a subdivision plan because
you're not dividing land. Therefore, the
development could proceed without oversight of
the planning commission. Well, we developed a
development plan in Houston that any time that you
are building a new building or modifying an
existing building such as you enlarge its size,
its footprint, you then have to submit a
development plan that will bring you under the new
controls. And in 1985, we had the development plan
concept codified under state law as applicable
only to Houston. And in 1987, the current session
of legislature, we went one step further and gave
it a development plan, the same recognition as a
subdivision plan, for the dedication of right of
way, for filing in the county clerk's office, et
cetera. So now we have two types of plans in
Houston. And that's something peculiar to
Houston, but meets the need that we have here of
bringing in all development that occurred before
1983 under our current controls. In working
through your sector plans, you mentioned that
this will be coordinated by a task force, or that it
will be assisted by a task force. Yes. It will be
functionally oriented people, experts. But
you'll also, I presume, have a regular planning
staff person. assigned to each of these sectors as
they move through to their own development plans
to coordinate it with the central office here so
that they can be provided with advice regarding
any overall considerations that the planning
department has for that particular area of the
city so that you won't be handed something that you
can't use. No. Actually, we will prepare the plans
here. The neighborhood planning process is going
to be handled by our neighborhood planning
division. The sector planning process is going to
be handled by the comprehensive planning
division. I see. Who's heading up the
neighborhood planning division now? Paulette
Wagner. I think that's the person that Roberta
told you to interview. Yes. Okay. Okay. And so in
each of those divisions, there are planners
assigned
in such numbers that we can assign a planner to each
plan. And that planner then will have the
responsibility of carrying that plan all the way
through. The task force and the technical
advisory committee are there to review his work
and provide him information, ensure that we're
not committing, for example, Harris County flood
control to something that they don't plan to do. We
have a water plan, master water plan, master
wastewater plan, ensure that these technical
people understand what's going in the plan and
that we can accomplish what the plan will call for.
We want this to be a plan that is When we develop a
10-year strategy or a year 2000 strategy, that the
things that are going to this plan will be doable in
that period of time. And so to a certain extent,
these plans are going to be proactive plans
because we've had the participation and the
cooperation of all these various city
departments. They will then know what the plan
calls for their departments to do. And we would
then expect them to be able to carry out what the
plan commits them to do. If they don't have the
ability of doing it, then they need to tell us at the
planning stage so that we can iron that out. And you
say that this process will probably take five
years? Well, we're talking about a four-year
process. Individual plans will probably take us
about eight months each to do because there are
three public hearings set up and a process by which
eventually the city council will approve each
plan to ensure that everyone recognizes that this
is an official process. official plan. Will these
be adopted separately by the Council? Yes, they
will be adopted separately and the Planning
Commission will adopt them separately and refer
them to City Council. Will they be published
separately? Yes, we're calling our operation the
Compendium of Plans. So we figured that we're
going to have a library that's going to have 51
documents. Almost one. 53 documents, isn't it?
One for each week of the year. Yeah. 48 of these
documents are going to be either neighborhood or
sector plans, 23 sector and 25 neighborhoods.
Then we will have four quadrant summaries, and
then we will have the overall summary. And we're
planning, for example, to distribute these by
having people subscribe, like planning firms and
development firms to subscribe so they would get
the plans as they come off the assembly line and uh
and then we get them periodically and then we can
also make them available individually bound so
that specific neighborhoods can get copies of
their own plan the uh I believe right now with our
staffing that we probably have the capability of
doing four or five sector plans and four or five
neighborhood plans simultaneously. So even
though the whole process will take us four years,
there will be plans coming off the assembly line
after eight months. on a continuous basis during
that period of time. So it will be a gradual
process. And that's another reason for using this
building block approach, is that we will have
usable documents early in the process without
having to wait five years before we had something
that we could use. Well, that's an advantage
politically, I'm sure.
At the end of this, after everything has been
adopted, then you're presumably in planner's
heaven. What will life be like after adoption of
plans? Well, one of the things we, particularly
the sector plans, we figure are going to undergo
considerable revision. So we have set a biannual
updating process. Those sector plans that are in
the high growth areas of the city will require
revision. All plans will be reviewed every two
years. I would imagine that the inner city plans
are going to be relatively stable, but that those
in rapid growth areas are going to be subject to
continuous flux, and so we will be updating them
and keeping current with them. Of course, we've
already mentioned the new policy of, I guess it's
an informal policy, of encouraging infilling
into the older neighborhoods of Houston and
greater attention to the needs of the commuter and
metro and whatnot. That's quite a change from what
it has been in the past when potential is largely
focused on the fringe growth areas. Yes, we have a
plan right now, our mobility plan, which is a gold
document for mobility.
Establish goals for all the various agencies
responsible for traffic and transportation
within the city, the state highway department,
the metro, the city. And so right now, we're
spending approximately $2 billion a year to
improve traffic in Houston. And the eventual goal
of our program is traffic
and the condition of traffic, instead of being one
of the black marks looked at when Houston is being
considered. It'll be one of the positive points.
And so we're proceeding with that. There's
construction underway now all over the city. In
its last bond issue, the city made a $600 million
bond issue for public improvements, $400 million
of which is going to streets. So the highway
department has commitments. Every freeway in the
city now is under construction or under
expansion. Metro is implementing their process
of putting bus lanes in the middle of every freeway
and high occupancy vehicle lanes, actually. And
so that we're seeing the light at the end of the
tunnel, you might say, in that we're looking at the
year 1994 when our system will be at capacity. And
everything we do after 1994 will be, and that's
from a system that was operating at 175% capacity.
And that is, that would be the period in 1994 would
be our break over point after which we will be
building for projected growth rather than just
building as a result of overcapacity of the
system. Well, I've read horror stories about
fires that have occurred in Houston, and there has
not been enough water pressure to put them out.
There have been so many leaks in the water
distribution system that the pressure is
insufficient for the fire.
Well, I think we have two major, well actually
three major enterprise programs. We call them
enterprise funds in the city because those are
funds that do not require money from the tax base.
One is water, one is wastewater, and the other is
airports. The water system right now, our master
plan for water actually is not directed towards
the matter of pressure and capacity because most
of the city now is receiving its full range of
capacity. Now, we do not have and do not meet the
state standard of overhead water tanks to provide
pressure in case of a power failure. And that is a
continuing problem we have with the Water
Commission, that it would cost multiple millions
of dollars to build those tanks in order to have
water. Because the maximum altitude in Houston is
40 feet above sea level. And so we can't, in order to
provide gravity pressure, we would have to do it
artificially. So our entire system is based on
pump pressure. Now there are some neighborhoods
where we're in the process of replacing lines to
provide adequate pressure. But under our current
standards, we require the distance between water
mains and water pressure the city is basically
overcome that problem that you indicated there
are some areas in the city still particularly
industrial areas along the waterfront that might
be a little further than 200 feet that we normally
require from a water from a fire main but as a whole
the all new development and most of the older city
now meets that standard now in the area of
wastewater We have embarked on another
multi-billion dollar program to provide
wastewater capacity. And we are again looking at
1994 as a year in which we will be able to do away with
all building controls as a result of lack of
wastewater capacity. And at the present time,
there is considerable work going on. As I say, it's
a multi-billion dollar program, about $2.5
billion to bring us up to that capacity. And as far
as airports are concerned, we are expanding both
Hobby and Intercontinental. Ellington Air Force
Base, which has been turned over to the city, is
being converted into a general aviation airport.
And we've initiated the study for the West
Airport, which would be a West commercial
airport. In the vicinity of Katy? Yes, it'll go in
this area here, which is between Brookshire and
Katy. This is the area for the airport, which the
city has already bought. They already own that
land. That'll be very handy for people from
College Station. Well, it'll be a lot closer going
into Intercontinental. Right now, going into
Intercontinental from the north is almost
impossible. There doesn't seem to be any direct
connection by road from Interstate 45 to the
airport coming from the north. Well, of course,
eventually we're going to have the Grand Parkway.
And on the map behind you, you can see the track of
the Grand Parkway, which is, yes, that heavy blue
line coming across right there. No, no, around.
It'll be a circle. Go up, right there, go left now.
See that line? Oh, yeah. OK, that's the Grand
Parkway. And what it'll do, you'll be able to pick
that off of 290 and then get on the Grand Parkway,
and then come on around, and then get off and get
down to the airport. So you'll have the toll road
coming straight south from there. going by the
airport. It's the connection between Interstate
45 and the airport coming from the north at this
time. Well, see, between those two, we're now
building the toll road, party toll road. Right
here. Yeah. And that's going to be able to bring you
down, straight down, and that'll have an exit at
the airport. I hope it has a sign saying airport.
There is none now. Absolutely none. When you come
from the north, there is no sign saying airport
until you get way down south of the airport and then
you have to take the lateral. As a matter of
interest, since you drive down from A&M all the
time, you enter Houston ETJ when you leave the city
limits of Prairie View. Come on.
That's the limit of our ETJ. That red line on that
map is the ETJ.
We actually go further past Prairie View. We just
have to stop at the city limit. You ran out of map.
Very interesting. OK. An additional
responsibility that we have is to maintain the
extraterritorial jurisdiction and city limit
agreements with 25 separate municipalities that
impinge on the borders of Houston. What we do is we
trade off ETJs and make certain agreements. For
example, Hull Airport, which is outside Sugar
Land, was in our ETJ. Sugar Land desired to make
that their municipal airport and wanted to spend
municipal bonds to improve it, but they couldn't
do it as long as it was in our ETJ because they would
never be able to annex it. So we agreed to trade Hull
Airport to them. But in return, we got ETJ back from
Sugar Land that begins to surround Sugar Land, so
that Sugar Land won't be able to grow. We're now
south of Sugar Land, all the way down to the Brazos
River. And so we've cut off Sugar Land from going to
the south, so basically Sugar Land has become a
fixed size. Like Bel Air. Yes. And eventually,
we'll be able to surround them with ETJ, and they
won't be able to grow. And of course, that was our
purpose, to do that. They needed the airport bad
enough that they were willing to give up that
authority. But we trade all the time. And we get
involved in the creation of water districts and in
monitoring the water districts. We have
responsibility for monitoring all 600 municipal
utility districts in the Houston area. On the map
behind you, therefore, it says water districts.
You see all the water districts that surround the
city. The water district is our unit of land by
which we annex, because we have to annex entire
water districts. And on that map you're looking at
actually is our last annexation with respect to
what water districts were involved. We annexed
about 13 square miles last year, about 25,000
population. We are doing an orderly annexation.
We have what we call an aggressive annexation
policy. However, this year, because of two
things, the great commitment of our enterprise
funds, water and sewer, to meet existing needs and
their inability to aggregate more debt, because
we have to assume the debt of these utility
districts. And also the city's inability to
assume more debt from a debt service perspective.
We limit our annexation only to very essential
elements. But we see that probably with the 1990
census, it will free us up under the Voter Voting
Rights Act to be able to annex major areas like the
1960 area. Because what we think that 1990 census
will indicate is that our minority populations in
the central city will have grown to the extent that
we will be able to annex the Anglos that live out in
the 1960 area without altering the racial balance
in the city that existed in 1965, which is a
requirement of the act.
Very interesting. I understand that HGAC has
recently completed a regional waste disposal
plan. that has received uh has been received
rather well and houston is participating in that
yes
we're looking very closely at resource recovery
now there we have right now the city of houston does
not have any landfills and it's not operating in
landfills we contract with private companies
it's a rather expensive uh proposition Right now,
as part of our CIP, we're looking at buying a site in
Brazoria County, which is some 35 miles from the
city, and which would involve a rather
comprehensive transportation plan to get
everything down there, because our city, our ETJ
from end to end is 70 miles, so that you would take
the far end, you might have 50 to 100 miles to go with
some of the waste. And so therefore, we're looking
at resource recovery, which would be a plant that
would burn the garbage and trash, convert it to
electricity, and also reduce the ash. And the ash
then would be transported by railroad car down to
this landfill in Brazoria County. And you'd have
only one of these facilities? Well, we're talking
about building one, which would be a centralized
one, a major one. We don't have it built yet. In the
meantime, we're using BFI facilities. But it's
very difficult to place landfills with the growth
that has occurred around Houston in any area which
is accessible. We have to go out considerable
distances. So what we do now is we have transfer
stations throughout the city where the trucks
that do the initial pickup bring the stuff in, and
then it's transferred to bigger trucks and then
carted out to the landfills. Well, it's a problem
for cities all around the country now. It's one of
the major political headaches. Well, that would
be one of the reasons that I see this resource
recovery plant as a major solution to our problem.
One of the things that happened is that we were in
the process of getting it built. by the private
sector using the tax credits, et cetera, that were
allowed under the law, the new tax bill eliminated
most of those credits. So now we're going to have to
look at a different way of financing
it. And then glass would be treated separately to
recover the oil. Well, I've gone to see the one in
Baltimore. Baltimore has a state of the art. And
what they have a way of doing is they actually
recover a lot of the materials, metals and so
forth, and use that also as a source of revenue. But
they just, in Baltimore, they just tip the garbage
trucks right into the pit, and they burn
everything.
Interesting. There's no pre-separating.
Reminds me, when I lived in LA as a kid, we had to
separate our glass and our cans from garbage. We
had three sacks. for every pickup. Everybody did
it. No one complained. I think it's just what you
get used to doing. One of the things you look at is
the caloric content of the mix. And it has been
found this system, for example, could be used in
underdeveloped countries because the caloric
mix of garbage there is different than American
garbage.
But Baltimore has proved to be a A very successful
operation.
Ephraim, thanks very much for your time. You'll
receive a transcript of this whenever we can get
around to doing it. And I hope that you can return it
more quickly than we can get the transcript to you.
Thanks very much. OK.